Implement legacy collections using glob (#11976)
withastro/astro: .changeset/quick-onions-leave.md

---
'astro': patch
---

> Implements legacy content and data collections using `glob()` loader

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refactors legacy `content` and `data` collections to use the Content Layer API `glob()` loader for better performance and to support backwards compatibility
```
Whatever the actual reasons/benefits are: preparing for easier transitions from old to new? I like the use of "refactors" here rather than "implements" because it helps with the "this is an old/existing thing that we've changed" messaging which is how *they* experience this.

Any legacy content collections are handled like this:

- a `glob` loader collection is defined, with patterns that match the previous handling (matches `src/content/<collection name>/**/*.md` and other content extensions depending on installed integrations, with underscore-prefixed files and folders ignored)
- When used in the runtime, the entries have an ID based on the filename in the same format as legacy collections
- A `slug` field is added with the same format as before
- A `render()` method is added to the entry, so they can be called using `entry.render()`
- `getEntryBySlug` is supported

Legacy data collections are handled like this:

- a `glob` loader collection is defined, with patterns that match the previous handling (matches `src/content/<collection name>/**/*{.json,.yaml}` and other data extensions, with underscore-prefixed files and folders ignored)
- Entries have an ID that is not slugified
- `getDataEntryById` is supported

While these emulate most of the features of legacy collections, they have these differences:

> - Implicit collections for folders in `src/content` are only defined if no other collections use content layer. If no content layer collections are defined, and there are folders in `src/content` that don't match collections in `src/content/config.ts` then collections will be auto-generated for them. This is not recommended, and a warning will be logged that this is deprecated. A collection should always be defined in `config.ts`. For legacy collections these can just be empty declarations: e.g.`const blog = defineCollection({})`. 

Author: Thanks! I've rewritten this whole section. The reason I included this behaviour at all is because I *do* see a lot of people using these auto-generated collections without config. I didn't want everything to break as they upgraded, and I don;t want them to just immediately enabled the legacy flag! Adding this fallback behaviour helped get us to working with most sites, while also loudly warning that they should upgrade.

The only reason I've included the fact that it exists in the docs is because of the scenario where it works, but then stops working if they add new collections. I want the behaviour to be:

- your config is untouched, most things will Just Work with no changes
- you start to upgrade, you then should add the one-liner for all of your previously auto-generated collections

I'd love your thoughts on how best to communicate this (or if you think this is totally the wrong approach anyway)

- The `layout` field is not supported in Markdown
- Sort order of generated collections is non-deterministic and platform-dependent.
- `image().refine()` is not supported
- the key for `getEntry` is typed as `string`, rather than having types for every entry.

> A new config flag `legacy.collections` is added for users that need the old behavior. When set, collections in `src/content` are processed in the same way as before rather than being implemented with glob - including implicit collections. When set, content layer collections are forbidden in `src/content`, and will fail a build if defined.

Reviewer: ``````suggestion
A new legacy configuration flag `legacy.collections` is added for users that want to keep their current legacy (`content` and `data`) collections behavior (available in Astro v2 - v4), or who are not yet ready to update their projects:

```js
config example
```

When set, no changes to your existing collections are necessary, and the restrictions on storing both new and old collections continue to exist: legacy collections (only) must continue to remain in `src/content/`, while new collections using a `loader` from the Content Layer API are forbidden in that folder.
``````
I like giving people an out when describing a legacy flag like, "if you're not yet able to update immediately" because not everyone is able to do on our schedle, even if they *want* to!

:warning: **BREAKING CHANGE FOR LEGACY CONTENT COLLECTIONS** :warning:

By default, collections that use the the old types (content or data) are now implemented using the glob loader, with extra backward-compat handling. This includes any collection without a `loader` defined.

Any legacy content collections are handled like this:

- a `glob` loader collection is defined, with patterns that match the previous handling (matches `src/content/<collection name>/**/*.md` and other content extensions depending on installed integrations, with underscore-prefixed files and folders ignored)
- When used in the runtime, the entries have an ID based on the filename in the same format as legacy collections
- A `slug` field is added with the same format as before
- A `render()` method is added to the entry, so they can be called using `entry.render()`
- `getEntryBySlug` is supported

Legacy data collections are handled like this:

- a `glob` loader collection is defined, with patterns that match the previous handling (matches `src/content/<collection name>/**/*{.json,.yaml}` and other data extensions, with underscore-prefixed files and folders ignored)
- Entries have an ID that is not slugified

> - `getDataEntryById` is supported

Reviewer 2: I don't think this one and `getEntryBySlug` should be supported anymore. They're deprecated already IIRC so we should just remove them

Author: I only implemented them because this is meant for backwards-compatibility. Once they move to content layer-proper, they're not supported anymore.

While these emulate most of the features of legacy collections, they have these differences:

- No implicit collections. In order to be generated, a collection must be defined in `config.ts`. For legacy collections these can just be empty declarations: e.g.`const blog = defineCollection({})`. Removing implicit collections means that we can allow content layer collections in `src/content`.
- The `layout` field is not supported in Markdown

> - Experimental content collection cache is not supported

Reviewer 2: So CCC is still used with the legacy flag?

- Sort order of generated collections is non-deterministic and platform-dependent.

> - `image().refine()` is not supported

Reviewer 3: Is this not supported in content layer in general?

Author: No. It's one of the things I missed. It'll be tough to do, because of the fact we don't transform it into an object until runtime.

Reviewer 4: Sounds like something we should talk about, I think this is pretty widely used.

- a `glob` loader collection is defined, with patterns that match the previous handling (matches `src/content/<collection name>/**/*.md` and other content extensions depending on installed integrations, with underscore-prefixed files and folders ignored)
- When used in the runtime, the entries have an ID based on the filename in the same format as legacy collections
- A `slug` field is added with the same format as before
- A `render()` method is added to the entry, so they can be called using `entry.render()`
- `getEntryBySlug` is supported

In order to achieve backwards compatibility with existing `data` collections, the following have been implemented:

- a `glob` loader collection is defined, with patterns that match the previous handling (matches `src/content/<collection name>/**/*{.json,.yaml}` and other data extensions, with underscore-prefixed files and folders ignored)
- Entries have an ID that is not slugified
- `getDataEntryById` is supported

While this backwards compatibility implementation is able to emulate most of the features of legacy collections, there are some differences and limitations that may cause breaking changes to existing collections:

> - In previous versions of Astro, collexctions would be generated for all folders in `src/content`, even if they were not defined in `src/content/config.ts`. This behavior is now deprecated, and collections should always be defined in `src/content/config.ts`. For existing collections, these can just be empty declarations: e.g.`const blog = defineCollection({})`. To make it easier to migrate, for now Astro will still generate collections for folders without config, but *only* if no other collections use the new `loader()` syntax. A warning will be logged if this fallback behavior is used, and it will be removed in a future version.

Author: You know, I think you're right.
